# BIMM-143-Project-2-FINAL
This is my BIMM 143 Bioinformatics Project 2 final Code. My scientific question is: Does the microgravity environment in space affect gene expression in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs), and, through differential gene expression analysis, are the expression changes permanent after returning back to standard gravity from spaceflight? And my hypothesis is: If human induced-pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) are exposed to microgravity during space travel, then the hiPSC-CMs adapt to the microgravity by developing a unique gene-expression signature; the in-flight samples have an upregulation of expression in genes related to metabolic function, and decreased expression in genes related to DNA damage and repair, in comparison to the ground control samples. If the changes in gene expression in space microgravity are temporary, then subsequent to space travel, the gene-expression patterns of the in-flight samples revert to standard-gravity expression patterns post-flight.

The data necessary to perform these calculations in my code is below. The file is an excel sheet taken from Wnorowski, A., Sharma, A., Chen, H., Wu, H., Shao, N.-Y., Sayed, N., Liu, C., Countryman, S., Stodieck, L. S., Rubins, K. H., Wu, S. M., Lee, P. H. U., & Wu, J. C. (2019). Effects of spaceflight on human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocyte structure and function. Stem Cell Reports, 13(6), 960–969. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2019.10.006

[BIMM 143 Project 2 Dataset - Excel.xlsx](https://github.com/cschiffe/BIMM-143-Project-2-FINAL/files/7673181/BIMM.143.Project.2.Dataset.-.Excel.xlsx)


This is the only file needed to run the code.

The data that will be used in this project were found on from an article titled "Effects of Spaceflight on Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocyte Structure and Function" by Wnorowski et al.(2019) in the Supplemental Information section. This data was formatted as differential gene expression in a multi-group comparison among ground control, post-flight, and in-flight samples. These hiPSC-CMs originated from 3 different cell lines from 3 separate individuals; some of the cells from each cell line remained on Earth to act as a baseline measurement, and the other cells were flown to the ISS for 5.5 weeks. After 5.5 weeks, the in-flight samples were measured and sent back down to Earth. 10 days post-flight, the samples that were in space were measured again for differential gene expression. Each cell line in each condition were measured twice. There were 2635 specific genes that were measured to be differentially expressed and are present within the data set. The data set is an excel sheet and was downloaded directly from the paper and I will import it into R

Here is my code (just in case the html does not work) https://rpubs.com/cschiffe/844969
